---
layout: post
title: Web fonts&thinsp;&mdash;&thinsp;the death of type foundries?
---
In the spirit of Halloween [Jon Tan](http://jontangerine.com/ "website of Jon Tan") covered the ominous topic of <a href="http://jontangerine.com/log/2008/10/font-face-in-ie-making-web-fonts-work" title="@font-face in IE: Making Web Fonts Work"><code><span class="element">@font-face</span></code> linking</a> in a comprehensive article on his beautiful website. Font-linking continues to occupy heated discussion as a contentious topic between type-savy web developers, type designers, and type foundries with the heart of the debate focusing on licensing and copyright issues.

I've kept the implementation example to a minimum because it's well covered by Jon, other websites, and the <acronym title="World Wide Web Consortium">W3C</acronym>. Instead, I wanted to voice my thoughts on the struggle between type foundries and designers. Feel free to <a href="#thoughts" title="Skip down to the opinions">skip the technical summary</a>.

### Implementation summary
<p><a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/css3-webfonts/" title="W3C: CSS3 module: Web Fonts">&lsquo;Web fonts&rsquo;</a> is currently a <acronym title="World Wide Web Consortium">W3C</acronym> <acronym title="Cascading Style Sheet">CSS</acronym>3 working draft. It allows for the direct linking to font files that are then used by the browser to set text in, broadening the relatively limited palette of <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_safe_fonts" title="Wikipedia: Web-safe fonts">&lsquo;web-safe&rsquo;</a> typefaces. Many designers have been longing for direct font linking since the earliest days of <acronym title="Cascading Style Sheet">CSS</acronym>. This is achieved with the <code><span class="element">@font-face</span></code> element:</p>

<pre><code><span class="element">&#64;font-face</span> {
    <span class="property">font-family:</span> <span class="attribute">'Desired-Font'</span>;
    <span class="property">src:</span> <span class="attribute">url('Desired-Font.otf') format('opentype')</span>;
    }
</code></pre>

After defining the <code><span class="element">@font-face</span></code> element, you can directly refer to the linked font with the <code><span class="element">font-family</span></code> property:

<pre><code><span class="element">body</span> {
    <span class="property">font-family:</span> <span class="attribute">'Desired-Font', &hellip;</span>;
    }
</code></pre>

#### Embedded OpenType
We're all used to the major browsers not behaving in cohesion and web fonts is another victim of this. Presently <code><span class="element">@font-face</span></code> is supported in WebKit (and consequently browsers that use it), Mozilla Firefox 3.1 beta and the development version of Opera. Internet Explorer (<acronym title="Internet Explorer">IE</acronym>)&thinsp;&mdash;&thinsp;again, not surprisingly&thinsp;&mdash;&thinsp;does it's own thing. Enter Microsoft's proprietary Embedded OpenType (<acronym title="Embedded OpenType">EOT</acronym>). <acronym title="Embedded OpenType">EOT</acronym> was an endeavor by Microsoft to allow for font file linking on the web while safeguarding the typeface from being illegally copied by embedding the font, document to font and font to document. Linked fonts only are linked in one-way, document to font, allowing users to obtain the font with little difficulty. With Microsoft firmly opposed to supporting native OpenType linking as long as vendors object to it, <acronym title="Embedded OpenType">EOT</acronym> is set to be the only method available in <acronym title="Internet Explorer">IE</acronym> for use with <code><span class="element">@font-face</span></code>.

Technologically it's not the greatest solution&thinsp;&mdash;&thinsp;see Jon's frustrations with Microsoft's &#8216;<acronym title="Web Embedding Fonts Tool">WEFT</acronym>' converter that produces <acronym title="Embedded OpenType">EOT</acronym> files from OpenType files ([1](http://twitter.com/jontangerine/status/982005337 "Jon Tan&#8216;s twitter stream, Oct. 30"), [2](http://twitter.com/jontangerine/status/987695023 "Jon Tan&#8216;s twitter stream, Nov. 3"), [3](http://twitter.com/jontangerine/status/993929760 "Jon Tan&#8216;s twitter stream, Nov. 6")) and web security analyst [Chris Shiftlett's thoughts on web fonts](http://shiflett.org/blog/2008/oct/font-linking "Chris Shiftlett: Font Linking"). There are a range of other and related issues that were discussed at a <a href="http://www.w3.org/Fonts/Misc/minutes-2008-10" title="Minutes of a W3C meeting on EOT and font embedding, October 23, 2008."><acronym title="World Wide Web Consortium">W3C</acronym> meeting on <acronym title="Embedded OpenType">EOT</acronym> and font embedding</a>. These problems will impact its chances of adoption as a standard. In 2007 Microsoft tried to push <acronym title="Embedded OpenType">EOT</acronym> to be part of <acronym title="Cascading Style Sheet">CSS</acronym> but this move was rejected, and they have since resubmitted it as a standalone submission. If <acronym title="Embedded OpenType">EOT</acronym> is accepted Microsoft would have to 'open' the technology to allow for the cross-platform creation of <acronym title="Embedded OpenType">EOT</acronym> files. This will greatly hinder the adoption of <acronym title="Embedded OpenType">EOT</acronym> by the <acronym title="World Wide Web Consortium">W3C</acronym>, and for good reasons. For <acronym title="Embedded OpenType">EOT</acronym> to truly catch on it would effectively have to be open sourced... ...leaving that thought to die lonely at the bottom of a well. <span class="sidenote">Perhaps I&#8216;m being somewhat too cynical; it would be a pleasant surprise if Microsoft were to open <acronym title="Embedded OpenType">EOT</acronym>.</span>

#### Existing alternatives
<p>Besides image replacement, there are a few other options that bring additional typefaces to the web which aim to retain text accessibility and degrade gracefully when viewed in unsupported user agents. One is <a href="http://www.mikeindustries.com/blog/sifr/" title="Mike Davidson: sIFR 2.0: Rich Accessible Typography for the Masses"><acronym title="Scalable Inman Flash Replacement">sIFR</acronym></a> and the second and more recent, <a href="http://typeface.neocracy.org/" title="typeface.js: rendering text with Javascript, the canvas element, and VML">typeface.js</a>. However neither is suitable for setting anything more than headings or a few lines. <acronym title="Scalable Inman Flash Replacement">sIFR</acronym> uses Flash, which isn't a standard and quickly begins to affect page load times as well as resources; typeface.js meanwhile doesn&rsquo;t allow the selection of the rendered text. These alternatives would not compete with font linking if were to become a supported standard.</p>

<h3 id="thoughts">Finding opportunity in change</h3>
The technology implementation aside, direct font linking has raised licensing and copyright issues. Most type foundries that sell fonts, or rather sell licenses for fonts, <em>naturally</em> prohibit direct linking on the web. Foundries are afraid users will make copies of the linked fonts, putting an end to the foundry as the distributor. In the case of font linking, it would be menial for a user to extract the font of a web page: simply open the <acronym title="Cascading Style Sheet">CSS</acronym> source, locate the <code><span class="element">@font-face</span></code> definition and save the font file referenced in the <code><span class="property">src:</span></code> property.

Type foundries are the product of a change in technology, specifically the invention of the movable type and the printing press. Foundries have for the past four and a half centuries thrived through further advances, such as lithography in the 19<sup>th</sup> century, the invention of the typewriter and again adapted with the rising popularity of the personal computer in the 1980s. Gradually the entry barrier to printing was lowered. To print whatever you desired in 15<sup>th</sup>&ndash;19<sup>th</sup> centuries you either had to own a printing press or have some awesome friends; today anyone with a $1,000 computer and a $100 printer can print whatever they like and if you have access to public computing and printing services (your public library for instance) you could even do it for free.

Type foundries (like other industries) were forced to adjust their business models with the invention of each new printing technology. Industries that don't adapt generally whither, giving way to those that do. It is silly to assume you can endlessly make money selling licenses to the same thing while everything about you changes. Something of the sort is what is happening here.

In the fear that their revenue streams will be undercut type foundries are reacting adversely to the topic of font linking and even font embedding. Instead of seeking new opportunities in the advent of these technologies, type foundries are reluctant to support web fonts. Illegal copying and sharing of typefaces is of course a bad thing for foundries and I empathise with them on that level, but I fail to empathise with them in regards to font embedding. Foundries need to realise that as typography becomes liberalised through the advancement of technology (namely the personal computer and the Internet), they must adapt and change with the rest of us. Respected typographer and web developer Richard Rutter wrote in July on the subject of font embedding with his article, <a href="http://stepchildren.clagnut.com/blog/2166/" title="Richard Rutter: The future of web font embedding, July 2008."><em>The future of font embedding</em></a>:

<blockquote cite="Richard Rutter">
    <p>&hellip;[I]t&rsquo;s high time that font foundries and type designers stopped waving their hands in the air proclaiming the death of their industry, insisting that everyone will be pirating their fonts and installing them for free. Instead they should see this as an opportunity to be grabbed with both hands.</p>
</blockquote>

<h4>Hosting <span class="amp">&amp;</span> licensing service</h4>
Font embedding if implemented correctly as an open standard should be seen a new opportunity for foundries to sell fonts to a whole new market. One suggestion also advocated by Richard is for foundries to host embedded font files and sell them for use on websites. This would be in addition to the conventional model of selling licenses to weights and styles of a typeface individually or as a complete family based on the number of processors you intend to use them on (thankfully most foundries have realised the error in this and are now selling licenses per computer or per site, etc.).

This web licensing and hosting service would be one dandy (and profitable) solution. I do not have a clear-cut answer to this debate but ultimately in my experience the force of change is greater than any single proprietary interest and consequently always wins. Sometimes it takes a while and depending how involved parties react, things can get ugly, which sucks for everyone. What excites me are those who find new opportunities that flourish with the new developments. I hope foundries see this as one of those opportunities and not the extinction of their industry; I look forward to ditching hacks in favour of standardised and open font embedding&thinsp;&mdash;&thinsp;or even linking&thinsp;&mdash;&thinsp;because there are bigger fish to fry.

For anyone interested reading more, check out the <acronym title="World Wide Web Consortium">W3C</acronym> <a href="http://www.w3.org/Fonts/Misc/eot-report-2008" title="W3C: For and against standardizing font embedding.">report on for and against standardising font embedding</a>.